DOCKER IMAGES CREATION SECURITY MANAGEMENT STORAGE


A container image is a standardized package that includes all of the files, binaries, libraries, dependencies and configurations to run a container.

To share your Docker images, you need a place to store them.
Docker Hub is the default and go-to registry for images.


There are two important principles of images:

Images are immutable. Once an image is created, it can't be modified. You can only make a new image or add changes on top of it.

Container images are composed of layers. Each layer represents a set of file system changes that add, remove, or modify files. Each of the layers once created are immutable.

Because of the layerd structure of image build we can start using an image directly by adding all the dependencies and code in it.

Image Layers 

Each layer in an image contains a set of filesystem changes - additions, deletions, or modifications.

The first layer adds basic commands and a package manager, such as apt.
The second layer installs a Python runtime and pip for dependency management.
The third layer copies in an application’s specific requirements.txt file.
The fourth layer installs that application’s specific dependencies.
The fifth layer copies in the actual source code of the application.

This will make builds faster and reduce the amount of storage and bandwidth required to distribute the images. 
As the layers  need not be created again when we create the image again.
Layers let you extend images of others by reusing their base layers, allowing you to add only the data that your application needs.

Stacking of Layers 

Layering is made possible by content-addressable storage and union filesystems. While this will get technical, here’s how it works:

After each layer is downloaded, it is extracted into its own directory on the host filesystem.
When you run a container from an image, a union filesystem is created where layers are stacked on top of each other, creating a new and unified view.
When the container starts, its root directory is set to the location of this unified directory, using chroot.
When the union filesystem is created, in addition to the image layers, a directory is created specifically for the running container. This allows the container to make filesystem changes while allowing the original image layers to remain untouched. This enables you to run multiple containers from the same underlying image.

Docker executes each instruction in your Dockerfile, creating a layer for each command and in the order specified. For each instruction, Docker checks whether it can reuse the instruction from a previous build. If it finds that you've already executed a similar instruction before, Docker doesn't need to redo it. Instead, it’ll use the cached result. This way, your build process becomes faster and more efficient, saving you valuable time and resources.

Subsequent builds after the initial are faster due to the caching mechanism, as long as the commands and context remain unchanged. Docker caches the intermediate layers generated during the build process. When you rebuild the image without making any changes to the Dockerfile or the source code, Docker can reuse the cached layers, significantly speeding up the build process.

Any changes to the command of a RUN instruction invalidates that layer. Docker detects the change and invalidates the build cache if there's any modification to a RUN command in your Dockerfile.

Any changes to files copied into the image with the COPY or ADD instructions. Docker keeps an eye on any alterations to files within your project directory. Whether it's a change in content or properties like permissions, Docker considers these modifications as triggers to invalidate the cache.

Once one layer is invalidated, all following layers are also invalidated. If any previous layer, including the base image or intermediary layers, has been invalidated due to changes, Docker ensures that subsequent layers relying on it are also invalidated. This keeps the build process synchronized and prevents inconsistencies.

The cached is used to build because it increases efficiency, storage, speed on build time.


A Dockerfile is a text-based script that provides the instruction set on how to build the image.

A Dockerfile is a text-based document that's used to create a container image. It provides instructions to the image builder on the commands to run, files to copy, startup command, and more.

Building images should consider its size, context and security posture.


Building images - the process of building an image based on a Dockerfile.
Tagging images - the process of giving an image a name, which also determines where the image can be distributed.
Publishing images - the process to distribute or share the newly created image using a container registry.

When the docker file is used to build image it gives us an sha256 hash output at the end which is the last layer upon all the other layers.
To use that to run the container we can use the hash value also.

docker run sha256:9924dfd9350407b3df01d1a0e1033b1e543523ce7d5d5e2c83a724480ebe8f00

This is not suitable to use in finding searching andusing the images whenever we need to run a container. That is the reason we have image tagging.

The image is tagged with username/library-repo/imagename:tag. Where the username is the path of username used with the repository.

docker image tag my-username/my-image:v1

Then we can also retag an image to make one of it for other purposes like for different environment and repository.

docker image tag my-username/my-image another-username/another-image:v1

To build an image from an docker file we run the command below in the same directory where the docker file is.
If the docker file is in other directory we need to specify the path.

docker build -t freebox:v1  (imagename:tagename) 

docker build -t myapp1:v1 -f images/app1/Dockerfile

To list the build images and downloaded images from repository.

docker images -a

We can create an container image from an running container after setting the needed setup in the container wiht application and its data and dependencies

docker container commit -m "Add Node" busybox freebox  (freebox is the contianer created from running busybox

If we want to add an new command when starting/run the container in the docker file we use below

docker container commit -c "CMD node app.js" -m "Add app" app-container my-app1-container

To view the layers in the image we can use below command.

docker image history busybox

The image can be pushed and pulled from an repository library.

docker push tag my-username/my-image:v1

docker pull my-image:v1

To check the image info we use the below command

docker image inspect busybox

To remove all the images without tag in the system

docker image prune

To remove an specific image we must first delete any container associated with it and it should be stopped

docker image rm busybox:v1

To archive an image that is not running as container (only image) into .tar archive file

docker save -o imagefile.tar busybox

To extract image only from the archive .tar file, it do not run the contianer only extraction

docker load -i imagefile.tar

Command exports a container's filesystem (whether it's running or stopped) into a .tar archive. It captures the current state of the files but ignores volumes and Docker-specific metadata like ENV, CMD, or ENTRYPOINT. It is snapshot of filesystem of the image.
Use export for a quick snapshot of a container's files for disaster recovery.

docker export busybox -o my_freebox_snapshot.tar

Command creates a new Docker image from a .tar archive. Because the metadata was lost during export, you often need to manually re-add configurations like ENV, CMD, ENTRYPOINT the default command during import.
Use import to turn a custom filesystem (like a minimal Linux rootfs) into a new base image.

docker import -c "CMD ['sh', '-g', 'daemon off;']" my_freebox_snapshot.tar my_new_image:latest



