DOCKER CA CERTIFICATE OF DOMAIN NAME TLS IN CONTAINERS


In a Docker Swarm or containerised environment, managing SSL certificates for multiple Nginx/HTTPD services on the same node differs from a monolithic setup because containers are ephemeral and isolated.

The direct answer is to use Docker Secrets to securely distribute certificates to specific services. 
Point your DNS records for all domains to the IP addresses of your Swarm manager(s).


Using Docker Secrets (Recommended for Swarm) :
In Swarm, secrets are the native way to manage sensitive files like SSL keys and certificates. 
Certificates are stored in Docker Secrets or Swarm Configs.

Create Secrets: On your manager node, create secrets for each service's certificate and key.

docker secret create service1_cert ./service1.crt
docker secret create service1_key ./service1.key

Attach to Service: Grant the Nginx service access to these secrets in your docker-compose.yml.

Internal Path: Secrets are mounted as files at /run/secrets/<secret_name> inside the container.

Service-Specific Nginx Configuration
Each Nginx service must have a unique configuration pointing to its specific secrets. 
Configuration: Set the ssl_certificate and ssl_certificate_key paths to the /run/secrets/ location.
Port Mapping: Since multiple services cannot listen on the same physical port (e.g., 443) on a single node, you must either:
Map them to different high-order host ports (e.g., 8443, 9443).
Use a Reverse Proxy.

For managing SSL certificates across multiple containers, domains, and Docker Swarm services, the industry standard is to use a centralized Reverse Proxy that handles SSL termination automatically. The most effective tools for this in a Swarm environment are Traefik and Nginx Proxy Manager (NPM).

Architectural Solutions for Multiple Certificates :

For public domains, the most efficient method is using a reverse proxy that handles SSL Termination. This eliminates the need to create certificates manually for every container. 


The Reverse Proxy Pattern :
Instead of each microservice managing its own public SSL, use a single Entry Point service (like a "Gateway" Nginx or Traefik). 
Single IP/Port: The proxy listens on port 443.
SNI (Server Name Indication): It uses the incoming domain name (e.g., api.example.com vs web.example.com) to determine which certificate to use and which backend service to route to.
Dynamic Discovery: Tools like Traefik or nginx-proxy can automatically detect new services and generate/apply certificates using labels.
Route traffic via a single domain with multiple subpaths (e.g., /service1, /service2).
Route traffic internally from the proxy to your services using their Swarm service names. 

To create certificates for multiple containers serving different domains in a Docker Swarm environment, you can use Docker Secrets for manual distribution or an automated Reverse Proxy like Traefik or Nginx Proxy Manager for dynamic issuance.

If you are running internal microservices and need your own CA, follow these steps to generate and distribute unique certificates for each domain:

Create your Root CA :
Generate a private key and a self-signed root certificate that will sign all other service certificates. 
Key: openssl genrsa -out ca-key.pem 4096.
Certificate: openssl req -new -x509 -days 3650 -key ca-key.pem -out ca.pem.

Generate Service-Specific Certificates :
For each service/domain (e.g., service1.com, api.service2.local), repeat this process:
Create CSR: Generate a key and a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) for the specific domain.
Add SANs: Important! Use Subject Alternative Names (SAN) so the certificate matches the domain name.
Sign it: Use your ca.pem and ca-key.pem to sign the CSR and produce a unique .crt for that service. 
Instead of mapping local folders (which fail if a container moves to a different node), use Swarm Secrets


Traefik: Best for Swarm. It uses "Labels" on your services to automatically detect the domain and request a certificate from Let's Encrypt.
Nginx Proxy Manager: Provides a web UI to point domains to specific container ports and click "Request Certificate".
Certbot Container: You can run a standalone Certbot container that generates certificates and stores them in a shared volume or mounts them to Nginx. 

Whether using host port mapping (e.g., 8081:80, 8082:80) or a proxy, the certificate must match the SNI (Server Name Indication):
Port Mapping: The user visits domain1.com:8081. The certificate inside that container must have domain1.com in its SAN.
Reverse Proxy: The user visits domain1.com on port 443. The proxy looks at the domain, picks the matching certificate, and forwards the request to the correct container's internal IP. 

Recommended Method: Traefik (Dynamic Discovery)
Traefik is specifically designed for containerized environments like Docker Swarm. It "listens" to the Docker socket and automatically creates SSL certificates whenever you deploy a new service with specific labels. 

How it works: You run Traefik as a global service in your Swarm.
Automatic Configuration: When you deploy a service (e.g., web-app), you add labels to that service. Traefik sees these labels and automatically requests a Let's Encrypt certificate for the specified domain.
Service Discovery: It uses the Swarm overlay network to route traffic to the correct container, regardless of which host node the container is running on. 

User-Friendly Alternative: Nginx Proxy Manager (GUI) 
If you prefer a graphical interface over YAML configuration, Nginx Proxy Manager (NPM) is a powerful alternative. 

Setup: Deploy NPM as a service on your Swarm manager node.
Centralized Management: Use the web UI (typically port 81) to add "Proxy Hosts" for each domain.
Automated SSL: Inside the NPM UI, you can click a button to "Request a new SSL Certificate" via Let's Encrypt. NPM will handle the challenge and renewal for you.
Multi-Domain: You can point domain-a.com to container-1:8080 and domain-b.com to container-2:3000 all within the same interface. 

Challenges with Swarm & Port Mapping
The Shared Port Problem: Since multiple domains cannot all listen on port 443 simultaneously on a single host, the reverse proxy (Traefik or NPM) acts as the single entry point. It listens on 80/443 and distributes traffic internally.
DNS-01 Challenge for Multiple Hosts: If your Swarm is spread across different locations or uses multiple public IPs, use a DNS-01 challenge (e.g., via Cloudflare or AWS Route53). This allows the proxy to prove domain ownership via DNS records rather than a web server, making it work even if the container isn't reachable via port 80.
Persistence: Ensure the directory where certificates are stored (like acme.json for Traefik or the /data folder for NPM) is mounted to a persistent volume or a specific manager node so certificates aren't lost when containers restart. 

No, you do not need to add certificates inside the individual service containers (like your Nginx app containers) if your reverse proxy is already handling them. This is called SSL Termination.

Centralised Management: You only renew certificates in one place (the proxy) rather than inside 10 different containers.
Performance: The reverse proxy is optimized to handle the "heavy lifting" of encrypting and decrypting traffic.
Simplicity: Your internal containers can run on standard port 80. The proxy receives the "HTTPS" request, strips the encryption, and sends a standard "HTTP" request to the container over the secure internal Docker overlay network.

Traffic Flow
User from Internet → HTTPS (Port 443) → Reverse Proxy (Certificates live here).
Reverse Proxy → HTTP (Port 80) → Service Container (Over Docker's internal network).

For internal network to work in compliance like PCI-DSS we can use overlay network drivers encryption mechanism.