DOCKER VOLUMES AND VOLUME DRIVERS FOR STORAGE OF DATA OF CONTAINERS


Volumes are persistent data stores managed by Docker

Volumes allow data to persist beyond the lifecycle of a container, making them ideal for storing application data, logs, and databases in production environments.
They are created and managed by Docker, isolated from the host OS, and can be easily backed up or migrated.

Volumes vs. Bind Mounts:
Volumes are managed by Docker and are portable across different environments, while bind mounts directly map host directories/files into containers and depend on the host's directory structure.
Use volumes for portability, security, and ease of management; use bind mounts when you need direct access to files from both the host and the container.

Sharing Data Between Containers:
The same volume can be mounted into multiple containers, enabling data sharing (e.g., for log aggregation or shared database storage).
This is useful in production for scenarios like clustered applications or data pipelines.

Performance and Data Integrity:
Volumes provide better performance for write-intensive applications (like databases) compared to writing to a container’s writable layer, which uses a storage driver and is slower.
They are also safer for sharing data between containers and for high-performance I/O needs.

Volume Lifecycle:
Volumes exist independently of containers; deleting a container does not remove its volumes unless explicitly specified.
This ensures that important data is not lost when containers are updated or replaced in production.

Explicit Creation:
Named volumes are created using docker volume create <volume-name>.
You can also create a volume during container creation with when starting containers 
docker run -v <volume-name>:<container-path>.

Anonymous Volumes:
Created automatically when you use docker run -v /container/path without specifying a volume name.
Each anonymous volume gets a unique, random name.

All Docker-managed volumes (named and anonymous):
Stored in a directory on the Docker host, managed by Docker.

The default path is:
/var/lib/docker/volumes/<volume-name>/_data
For named volumes, <volume-name> is the user-specified name.
For anonymous volumes, <volume-name> is a randomly generated ID.

User-created (named) volumes:
Example path: /var/lib/docker/volumes/myvolume/_data

Anonymous volumes:
Example path: /var/lib/docker/volumes/2b3c4d5e6f7g8h9i0j1k2l3m4n5o6p7q/_data
The random string is the volume’s unique ID.


Docker volume drivers are plugins or mechanisms that determine how and where Docker manages the storage for volumes. By default, Docker uses the local volume driver, which stores data on the host filesystem. However, you can use other drivers—including third-party or external plugins—to store data on remote systems or integrate with external storage solutions.

Volume Drivers (How Data Is Managed)

Default Driver:
Docker uses the local driver by default, which stores data on the host filesystem.

Custom Drivers:
You can specify other drivers (e.g., for cloud storage or networked filesystems) when creating a volume.

Driver Management:
The driver determines how and where the volume data is stored and accessed.
Most production use cases use the default local driver unless there’s a need for remote or specialized storage.

Persistence:
Volumes persist data even after containers are removed.

Isolation:
Volumes are managed by Docker and isolated from the host’s core filesystem, making them safer and more portable than bind mounts.

Performance:
Volumes provide near-native filesystem performance and are ideal for high-performance and persistent data needs.


Default Driver:
If you do not specify a driver, Docker uses the "local" driver, which stores volume data on the host machine.

Custom/External Drivers:
You can use volume plugins (drivers) to integrate Docker with external storage systems (e.g., Amazon EBS, NFS, cloud storage). These plugins provide writable paths on the host, which Docker then mounts into containers.

Specifying a Driver:
When creating a volume, you can specify the driver with the --driver flag.

docker volume create --driver <driver-name> <volume-name>

Isolation:
Volume plugins/driver should not write data to Docker’s internal /var/lib/docker/ directory. Instead, they manage their own storage locations.

Use Cases:
Volume drivers are useful for persisting data beyond the lifetime of a single Docker host, enabling high availability, and integrating with enterprise storage solutions.

Volume drivers allow Docker to manage persistent storage in a flexible way, supporting both local and external storage backends. The driver you choose determines where and how your data is stored and accessed.
The Docker daemon makes these volumes available to containers by bind-mounting the provided paths into the containers with volume driver.


When you mount a volume, Docker makes the volume’s directory on the host available at a specified path inside the container.
This is similar to bind mounts, but volumes are fully managed by Docker and not tied to the host’s directory structure or OS.
You can mount a volume as read-write (default) or read-only, depending on your needs.

Mounting a volume means making a specific directory from the Docker host (managed by Docker) available inside a container. The main purposes of mounting volumes are:

Persisting Data: Data written to a volume persists even after the container is removed, making it ideal for databases or application data that must survive container restarts or re-creations.

Sharing Data: Volumes can be mounted into multiple containers, allowing them to share data easily.

Performance: Volumes provide the same raw file performance as accessing the host filesystem directly, making them suitable for performance-critical data processing and high-performance I/O.

Isolation and Management: Volumes are easier to back up, migrate, and manage using Docker CLI commands or the Docker API. They are also more safely shared among multiple containers compared to bind mounts.

Volumes are managed by Docker and are the preferred way to persist and share data between containers. When you mount a volume into a container, the container can read from and write to that volume by default.
You can control access permissions when mounting volumes using the Docker CLI. For example, you can specify if a mount is read-only or read-write.

Volume plugins can provide volumes from external storage systems. The Docker daemon makes these volumes available to containers by bind-mounting the provided paths.
Plugins must provide writable paths, but the actual permissions depend on how the plugin and underlying storage are configured.

Permissions
By default, volumes are mounted with read-write access.
You can mount a volume as read-only by specifying the :ro option.
The actual file and directory permissions inside the volume depend on the container’s user and the underlying host filesystem.

Storage drivers manage the container’s writable layer and image layers. They are optimized for space efficiency, but may have lower write speeds compared to native file system performance.
For write-intensive or persistent data, Docker recommends using volumes instead of relying on the storage driver’s writable layer.


Creates a new, named volume managed by Docker, which can be reused across containers.

docker volume create <volume-name>

Shows all volumes managed by Docker on the host.

docker volume ls

Displays detailed information about a specific volume, such as its mount point and usage.

docker volume rm <volume-name>

Attaches the specified volume to a path inside the container, persisting data written to that path.

docker run -v <volume-name>:<container-path>

To mount the volumes in the contianer when we have created an path of directory and when it is done when running contianer.

docker run --mount type=volume,src=<volume-name>,dst=<mount-path>

docker run --volume <volume-name>:<mount-path>

docker run -d \
  --name devtest \
  --mount source=myvol2,target=/app \
  nginx:latest

To privide the permissions for the volume mounts default is RW it can be RO

docker run --mount type=volume,src=myvolume,dst=/data,ro,volume-subpath=/foo


Databases and Stateful Services:
Use named volumes to persist database files, ensuring data survives container restarts, upgrades, or failures.
Example: docker run -v db-data:/var/lib/mysql mysql:latest

Log Aggregation:
Mount a shared volume to multiple containers to collect logs in a central location for analysis or shipping to external systems.

Application Data:
Store user uploads, cache files, or other persistent data in volumes to decouple data from the container lifecycle.

Backups and Migration:
Volumes are easier to back up and migrate than bind mounts, making them suitable for production where data durability is critical.


Volumes are the preferred mechanism for persisting data generated by and used by Docker containers. While bind mounts are dependent on the directory structure and OS of the host machine, volumes are completely managed by Docker. Volumes are a good choice for the following use cases:

Volumes are easier to back up or migrate than bind mounts.
You can manage volumes using Docker CLI commands or the Docker API.
Volumes work on both Linux and Windows containers.
Volumes can be more safely shared among multiple containers.
New volumes can have their content pre-populated by a container or build.
When your application requires high-performance I/O.
Volumes are not a good choice if you need to access the files from the host, as the volume is completely managed by Docker. Use bind mounts if you need to access files or directories from both containers and the host.

Volumes are often a better choice than writing data directly to a container, because a volume doesn't increase the size of the containers using it. Using a volume is also faster; writing into a container's writable layer requires a storage driver to manage the filesystem. The storage driver provides a union filesystem, using the Linux kernel. This extra abstraction reduces performance as compared to using volumes, which write directly to the host filesystem.

Where Each Type Fits
Volumes: Best for production data that needs to persist, be portable, and managed by Docker. Use for databases, application data, and shared storage between containers.
Bind Mounts: Use for development or when you need direct access to files from both the host and container (e.g., source code mounting during development).
Tmpfs Mounts: Use for ephemeral data that should not persist beyond the container’s lifecycle (not covered in detail in the provided sources).

