DOCKER SWARM OVERLAY NETWORK BASIC PORT's SETUP


In a Docker Swarm overlay network, the port used for the actual data traffic (including HTTP/HTTPS communication between containers) is 4789. 
Here is the breakdown of what those specific ports do:
4789 (UDP): This is the Data Plane. It is used for VXLAN overlay network traffic. When one container talks to another over the overlay, the data travels through this port.
7946 (TCP/UDP): This is the Control Plane. It is used for "gossip" communication (container discovery and health checks) between nodes.
2377 (TCP): This is for Cluster Management. It is used for communication between manager nodes to maintain the swarm state.


The reason UDP is used for the Docker Swarm overlay network (port 4789) instead of TCP is that the overlay uses VXLAN (Virtual Extensible LAN) encapsulation. 


While UDP itself is "unreliable," this does not mean your application's data will fail. Here is how it works:

1. Reliable Data Still Uses TCP 
If your application uses HTTPS or HTTP, it is already using a TCP connection. When this TCP data travels through the overlay: 

The original reliable TCP packet is encapsulated inside a UDP packet.
If the underlying UDP packet is lost, the original application-level TCP session will notice the missing data and trigger a retransmission.
The reliability is handled by the "inner" protocol (your app's TCP), while the "outer" protocol (UDP) provides a fast, low-overhead tunnel. 

2. Performance and Efficiency
Using TCP to transport another TCP connection (known as "TCP-in-TCP") can cause a massive performance collapse called TCP Meltdown.
Avoids Retransmission Storms: If both the tunnel and the data use TCP, both layers would try to retransmit lost packets simultaneously, causing congestion and making the network extremely slow.
Low Overhead: UDP does not require a "handshake" for every tunnel connection, making it much faster for moving massive amounts of container data across physical hosts.
Load Balancing: Modern network hardware can use the UDP source port to efficiently spread traffic across multiple physical paths (ECMP), which is harder to do with a single stateful TCP tunnel. 

Troubleshooting UDP Failures
If you are worried about UDP failing, it is usually due to a specific configuration issue rather than the protocol itself:
MTU Mismatch: Overlay networks add 50 bytes of overhead. If your physical network has a standard 1500 MTU, your containers should use 1450 MTU to prevent packets from being dropped.
Checksum Offloading: Some virtual network cards "help" by calculating checksums, but this can break VXLAN packets. Disabling this with ethtool -K <interface> tx off often fixes communication issues.
Firewalls: Ensure your firewall/Security Groups specifically allow UDP 4789.

No, these specific ports (2377, 7946, and 4789) should never be used by external users or external load balancers like Nginx or an API Gateway to send application traffic. 

These ports are strictly for the "under-the-hood" machinery that keeps the Docker Swarm overlay network running between your server nodes. 

Where External Traffic Actually Goes
When you use an external load balancer or an API Gateway for HTTP (80) or HTTPS (443) traffic, it interacts with your cluster in a completely different way:
Targeting the Published Port: You must tell your external load balancer to send traffic to the Published Port you defined in your service (e.g., docker service create -p 80:80).
The Routing Mesh: External traffic hits a Swarm node on that published port. The Swarm Routing Mesh then uses ports 7946 (to find where the container is) and 4789 (to tunnel the data) to get that traffic to the correct container.
Communication Flow:
External Client 
 External Load Balancer 
 Any Swarm Node IP (on port 80/443).
Swarm Node 
 Internal Container (using ports 7946/4789 internally between nodes). 
 
You should configure your firewall (like UFW or AWS Security Groups) so that 2377, 7946, and 4789 are only accessible to the other nodes in your cluster, not the open internet.
Only your application ports (like 80, 443, or 8080) should be open to your external load balancer or the public. 

Port 		Protocol	Scope		Who uses it?
2377		TCP			Internal	Manager nodes for cluster management.
7946		TCP/UDP		Internal	All nodes to "gossip" and discover each other.
4789		UDP			Internal	All nodes to move data packets between containers.
80 / 443	TCP			External	External Load Balancers (Nginx, Traefik, HAProxy).

The IPTable command to block the non encrypted traffic on port 4789 UDP.

iptables -I INPUT -m udp --dport 4789 -m policy --dir in --pol none -j DROP

This iptables command blocks all incoming VXLAN traffic (UDP port 4789) that is not protected by an IPsec tunnel. 
It is a security measure often used in cloud networking environments (like Docker Swarm or Kubernetes) to ensure that overlay network traffic is encrypted before it reaches the host. 

Breakdown of the Command
Each part of the command specifies a precise filter for the incoming network packet:
iptables -I INPUT: Inserts this rule at the very top of the INPUT chain, ensuring it is evaluated before any other rules.
-m udp --dport 4789: Uses the UDP module to target traffic arriving on destination port 4789, which is the standard port for VXLAN (Virtual Extensible LAN).
-m policy --dir in --pol none: This is the core of the rule. It uses the policy module to check if the packet is part of an IPsec security association.
--dir in: Checks incoming packets.
--pol none: Matches packets that have no IPsec policy applied (i.e., they are unencrypted/plain text).
-j DROP: Tells the firewall to silently discard any packet that matches these criteria. 


In a secure encrypted overlay network, nodes communicate by wrapping VXLAN packets inside an IPsec tunnel. If a node receives a VXLAN packet on port 4789 that is not encrypted (--pol none), it could be a spoofing attempt or a misconfiguration. This rule "drops" those insecure packets to maintain the integrity of the encrypted network.


In Docker Swarm mode, whether you need static IPs or DNS depends on the role of the node and how you intend to route external traffic. 
Node IP Requirements
Manager Nodes: Highly recommended to have static IP addresses. Managers are the stable control plane of the cluster. If a manager's IP changes (e.g., after a reboot), other nodes will lose connection to it, potentially causing the cluster to become unstable or lose quorum.
Worker Nodes: Can use dynamic IP addresses. Workers join the cluster by connecting to a manager's IP; if a worker's own IP changes, it can simply rejoin the manager.

DNS and External Connectivity
You do not strictly need an external DNS for the nodes to function internally, as Swarm has an internal DNS for service discovery between containers. However, external DNS is required if you want outside clients or an API Gateway to reach your services using a domain name.

Connecting to Nginx / API Gateway
If you are using an external Nginx Load Balancer or API Gateway for HTTPS traffic and TLS termination:
Static IPs for Ingress: Your Nginx/Gateway must be configured to point to the nodes. Because of Swarm’s Routing Mesh, you can point your load balancer to any node's IP in the cluster, and it will route the request to a node running the service.
Reliability: To avoid manual updates to your Nginx config, it is best practice to have at least a few nodes (often the managers) on static IPs and point your Gateway to those.
TLS Termination: Since the built-in Swarm Routing Mesh only operates at Layer 4 (TCP/UDP), it cannot handle SSL/TLS termination itself. You must use an external balancer like Nginx or an internal reverse proxy (like Traefik or Nginx as a Swarm service) to handle TLS certificates and verification. 

Component 		    IP Requirement			Connectivity Purpose
Manager Nodes 	    Static (Recommended) 	Maintaining cluster state and quorum; stable join point for 
											workers.
Worker Nodes	    Dynamic (Allowed)		Executing tasks; only needs to reach the manager's IP.
Nginx /API Gateway	Static / Fixed DNS	    Acting as the entry point for external HTTPS traffic and 
											TLS termination.